draft Why We Choose What We Choose (#743)
pyOpenSci/pyopensci.github.io: _posts/2025-10-02-why-we-choose-what-we-choose.md

---
layout: single
title: "Why We Choose What We Choose"

> excerpt: "In selecting one way to package Python, pyOpenSci chooses between a lot of code tools. These choices often come after months of exploration and debate. Find out what motivates us to make the decisions that we do."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
excerpt: "In selecting one workflow to package a Python project, pyOpenSci chooses between a lot of code tools. These choices often come after months of exploration and debate. Find out what motivates us to make the decisions that we do."
```

Reviewer: Small nit. We're not really packaging Python but a Python project.

author: "Jeremiah Paige"
permalink: /blog/pyopensci-why-we-choose.html
categories:
  - blog-post
  - community
classes: wide
toc: true
comments: true
last_modified: 2025-10-02
---

A primary focus at pyOpenSci, one of our petals of support, is selecting packaging tools that work well for our users and work well together. We use our curated selection of tooling in our packaging guide, in our online tutorials, and in our trainings. We don’t require the use of any of our selected tools to submit a package to our peer review program but we will suggest them if the package authors ask for help trying to clean up or adopt new workflows.

> The members of pyOpenSci spend a great deal of time selecting these tools, debating tradeoffs, test-driving them in new situations, looking at new community trends, and listening to feedback from events we run. But up until now we haven't typically posted in the open either how or why we have come to the decisions we did. This post outlines, in not very strict terms, the rubric we use when selecting a project that we want to recommend. We focus on a beginner-leaning happy path for packaging workflows. In other words, what works really well for new projects that don't have a lot, if any, non-conventional requirements to share their code.

Author: This is the only suggestion I didn't fully agree with. I think it changes the meaning I am intending to convey. I think we do overly account for projects that are beginning from scratch (like with our copier). And I don't think we entirely focus on pure-python projects. That's basically all the examples we have up, but I see us specifically selecting tools that can either allow us to teach extension modules, or that the learner can take with them and add more complex requirements as they need them without having to revisit their stack.
Also (non-conventional) requirements wasn't referring to project dependencies, but requirements in the abstract, such as must support HPC, or still needs to build 2.7 wheels, etc.

> The members of pyOpenSci spend a great deal of time selecting these tools, debating tradeoffs, test-driving them in new situations, looking at new community trends, and listening to feedback from events we run. But up until now we haven't typically posted in the open either how or why we have come to the decisions we did. This post outlines, in not very strict terms, the rubric we use when selecting a project that we want to recommend. We focus on a beginner-leaning happy path for packaging workflows. In other words, what works really well for new projects that don't have a lot, if any, non-conventional requirements to share their code.

Reviewer: Totally cool. Thanks for the additional context @ucodery.

Our rubric comes from five categories, approximately ordered as follows:

## Tools That Are Free and Open

We love open software! It's kind of in our name. We are always looking to nurture and support open source software, even beyond packaging projects. It should come as no surprise then, that we only choose tools in our packaging guide that are themselves open source.

> We don’t just appreciate open source though, we also look for projects that are open contribution – that do most of their maintenance, stewardship, and designing in public. This means that there is a public bug tracker, that new issues to that bug tracker are accepted from anyone, and also fixes for those bugs are accepted from non-maintainers. It may also mean that new features ideas are accepted from the community, or even given a period of public comment.

Reviewer 2: I think "new feature ideas" is more grammatically correct than "new feature**s** ideas." Alternatively, "ideas for new features" if you want to be plural for both idea and feature.

## Tools that are well supported

We would like to only recommend projects that we can confidently say are healthy, correct, and here to stay. A well-maintained project is a somewhat subjective metric that is hard to pin down, but whenever possible we would apply our [same standard](https://www.pyopensci.org/software-peer-review/how-to/author-guide.html#does-your-package-meet-packaging-requirements) for Peer Reviews of Scientific Software.

Authors and maintainers should respond to open issues and continue to make fixes to the project. We do not have any expectation or metric of response time, open bug count, time to close commit requests, security artifacts, or any other level of effort requirement; only that the project is alive and healthy to the degree that is appropriate for its function. We also strongly prefer projects that have a team of core maintainers as opposed to an individual maintainer.

## Tools that reduce user choices

> Python packaging suffers, perhaps infamously, from [Too Many Options](https://www.pyopensci.org/blog/python-packaging-friends-dont-let-friends-package-alone.html#just-say-no-to-tmo). We would like to make as many choices as we can on behalf of the learner. Better yet is to make choices that will eliminate further choices to be made later on in the process; this can help stop runaway analysis paralysis.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Python packaging suffers, perhaps infamously, from [Too Many Options](https://www.pyopensci.org/blog/python-packaging-friends-dont-let-friends-package-alone.html#just-say-no-to-tmo). We would like to make as many pragmatic choices as we can on behalf of the learner. Better yet is to make choices that will eliminate further choices and complexity later on in the process; this can help learners from getting stuck in runaway analysis paralysis.
```
